{
	title: Love is easy; aliveness is hard
}

I recently read [The Spiritually (Sometimes Not so Comfortable) Healing Nature of Relationships](http://peacefulwarriors.net/the-spiritually-sometimes-not-so-comfortable-healing-nature-of-relationships/). I found it to contain good info, be completely irrelevant, offer good advice, and give nothing practical. A more nuanced critique is in order. It is a good article; it is worth glossing.

h2. Natural vs. Learned

bq. We are not born knowing how to love. We are born knowing how to have sex and how to be spontaneous and alive. But turning aliveness and attraction into love is a totally different story.

Bullshit.

This is very common bullshit. I see it in a ton of articles. So it must match the lived experience of a lot of relationship authors. But it is a total mismatch to my lived experience. In fact, mine could be described as:

bq. We are not born knowing how to *create sexual tension or how to be spontaneous and alive*. We are born knowing how to *love and to have sex*. But *turning love into aliveness and attraction* is a totally different story.

(differences emphasized)

Which is not to say that my lived experience is any more correct than theirs. The more accurate quote would probably be:

bq. We are not born knowing how to love, have sex, or be spontaneous and alive. We are born knowing how to fuck. But loving, sponteneity, sexual tension, sex, and aliveness are all learned behaviors. Each of us learns some, none, or all of these before our conscious memories start, so we feel that that set is inborn. But it is worth remembering that humans have very few instincts. We learn almost everything. And so each person has mastered a different set of these at any given point in life and can choose to learn the others at any time.

That isn't nearly as pithy. But it does bring up some interesting asides.

h2. Fucking vs. Sex vs. Creating Sexual Tension

We seem to have instinctual knowledge of the basic mechanics. We all seem to come up with tab A goes in slot B, wiggle around a bit, have the man ejaculate. I'll call this fucking, for lack of a better word.

But that isn't sex.

Sex is a whole lot more. Sex is a nuanced conversation between 1 or more people (yes, you can have sex alone). It is a dance, an expression of emotion and connection, a continual reaction to what comes up and what doesn't, to desire, intent, limits, boundaries, and inspiration. Sex can happen without fucking. It often does. Sex can happen without physical contact, without orgasm. I've had sex using only touch on a person's arm, just shared breathing, only words, or just a set of looks from across a table or even a room.

Fucking is instinct. Sex is learned.

And sex and sexual tension are also entirely different. I've had amazing sex in my life. High reviews. And I've spent most of my life being absolute crap at creating the spark that causes someone to be interested in having sex with me.

Many people falsely assume a correlation between these. That the people they have spark with will be the people they have great sex with. To some degree this is true: if you feel a huge spark towards someone, then they don't have to be that good at sex for you to have a great time. However the reverse is not true: you can have great sex with someone you feel very little spark with.

In fact, great sex over time can create a spark that wasn't there before. When the sex is limited we call it flirting.

h2. The Entitled Child

bq. Most of us naturally have ideas how people should behave and how the world should be. [...] This is the entitled child inside of us. When someone close to us does not treat us in a way which feels respectful, loving, attentive and generous, we feel betrayed and our trust with that person gets frayed. Relationship, any deep relationship, is going to challenge us to drop our entitled child and come to terms with how people and life really are.

I agree that most of us have some level of expectation. We all expect respect, to be seen, and safety. Each of use has various ways in which we receive those. For example, each of these is how one person I know feels deeply respected:

* Give me choice. Not open-ended; know that I don't like logistics or waffling. But present me options and let me actively choose what to create. Let me be me, but also show up as you. Challenge me and accept challenge from me.
* Just tell me what you are going to do. Be transparent at all times.
* Tell me your overall intent. You don't need to keep me informed, just tell me what kind of relationship you want to create, and then act with integrity to that intent. Change the intent whenever you want, but do it explicitly.
* Involve me in your decisions. Before you choose a thing, seek my thoughts and insights. You may use them or not, but seek them. And when I have a choice to make, give me your insights when I ask.
* When you travel, bring me back a gift. Every time.
* Treat the people I care for well. Respect those we have in common; mace sure they feel safe, seen, and respected.
* Don't love me. I feel obligated when loved. Connect to me, share with me, have affection, but don't love me.
* Let me guard you. I can hold a wall to protect you for a moment while you recover. Use my guardianship to recover and resume your struggle with new insights and energy.
* Share your insights with me. I want to hear how you think.
* Don't chase me, especially not sexually. I'm happy to share space, but keep a safe distance between us.
* Share long conversations with me. Explore things by my side and see what we come up with. Share.

The article focuses on the entitlement. It asks people to grow less entitled. I agree and disagree.

I agree in that many people are extremely constrained in how they receive respect. If you don't give it their specific way, they don't receive it. These people will find more satisfying relationships if they can find a way to be more flexible in how they receive love. Not completely open-ended, but feel more ways.

I disagree in that to focus isn't on the entitlement. I focus on the respect, being seen, feeling safe, seeing things to explore, and so on. We are all entitled to these things. We really are. And it is worth discovering how each person in your life receives these things. When you want them to feel respected, show it in their way. That's not entitlement, that's respect.

We are all entitled children to some degree. We can mature ourselves to be able to separate the want from the way in which it is packaged. And we can hear how those around us want their wants packaged and deliver them that way.

h2. OK, Let's Get Practical

Many sections of this article have a good idea but in the form of vapid advice. "Be this way." "Think this way." "Grow more like this." They lack information about how to do those things.

I find most people have a pretty good idea about how they want to grow and behave. What they don't know is how to execute that change--or they would have already done so.

Someone please publish a form of this article where each paragraph is a link to a set of exercises, templated conversations, sequences of micro-skills, and other information on how to actually make the desired change. I'll do a couple of them here to get you started.

